1. Introduction
1.1. The trace cache
The trace cache approach relies on dynamic sequences of code being reused. This may be the case for two reasons
temporal locality -like the primary instruction cache, l the trace cache can count on instructions which have been recently used being used again in the near future.
1.2. Related prior work
1.3. Problems with other fetch mechanisms
l Pointers to all of the noncontiguous instruction blocks
1.4. Contributions
1.5. Paper overview
addr -
A
2. TJkace cache
2.1. Core fetch unit
l valid bit indicates this is a valid trace.
l tug identifies the starting address of the trace.
l brunchjlugs there is a single bit foreach branch within
b branch mask state is needed to indicate 1 the num-ber of branches in the trace and 2 whether or not the
l tracefall-throughaddress next fetch address ifthe last
l trace target address next fetch address if the last
2.3. Trace cache design space
3. Other high bandwidth fetch mechanisms
3.1. Branch address cache
Though conceptually the design has two pipeline stages, possibly one or more additional pipeline stages are implied by having the complicated alignment network. The align-
3.2. Collapsing buffer
,, ii. . . . . . .j
4. Simulation methodology
4.1. Processor model
4.2. Workload
struction path lengths. To simulate the IBS traces, we devel-oped a trace-driven MIPS processor simulator similar to the SPARC one.
4.3. Performance metric
5. Results
5.1. Single-cycle fetch latency
5.3. ‘Race cache effectiveness
-g 3.5
6. Conclusions
7. Acknowledgements
Figure 1. Decoupled fetch execute
Figure 2. High level view of the trace cache.
Figure 3. The core fetch unit.
Figure 4. The trace cache fetch mechanism.
Figure 5. Branch address cache approach.
Figure 6. BAC stores subgraphs of the CFG.
Figure 7. The collapsing buffer approach.
Figure 8. IPC results fetch latency
Figure 9. Improvement of SEQ.3 over SEQ.1.
Figure 10. Improvement over SEQ.3.
Figure 11. Improvement over SEQ.3 152 and L.3 stand for 2 and 3 cycle latency.
Figure 12. TC performance potential.
